Support for this podcast in the following message come from Parlophone Records presenting David Bowie who can I be now spanning his career from one thousand nine hundred forty one nine hundred seventy six the set contains the gaster an unreleased early version of young Americans twelve CD and thirteen LP boxed sets are available now.  Hey it's guy here and we have a new episode coming up right now but she asked before a quick request we're conducting a brief survey to learn more about who's listening to the TED Radio Hour and how you are using N.P.R. podcast so please visit N.P.R.'s.  O. R G slash Ted survey to complete the survey he would really help us out a lot.  Thanks.  This is the TED Radio Hour each week groundbreaking TED talk to TED Technology Entertainment Design design does that really would.  Stem from cheap I've never known but delivered TED conferences around the world gift of the human imagination we've had to believe in impossible things it's true nature of reality beckons just beyond those talks those ideas adopted for radio from N.P.R. 

I'm Guy Raz So if you've been watching T.V. in Norway on a Friday night a couple of years ago and you turned into the country's Public Broadcasting Channel.  You would have seen a train actually not a train but the view from the train's windshield and what you see gliding down some tracks in the region countryside.  Are these snow covered hills flowing by a low yellow sun flickering in a matter of the trees and the track stretching on and on right in front of you.  We mounted one camera in the front constantly filming what you would see that.  And Jim driver produced this video and we have two cameras pointing one to the left one to the rights to see the view and his team edited those three camera views into a single wide screen shot.  That's weirdly transfixing to watch and kind of peaceful like you were sitting in a glass bubble in front of the train.  If you'd wanted to you could watch this video shot from the front of this train traveling from the city of Bergen Norway to the capital Oslo for seven hours seven hours and fourteen minutes.  Everything is there that one heart is there and the and the good who watched this like who sat in front of a television and watched that this was one point two million know we watched part of this program on the water and yes OK so this experiment by Norwegian public broadcaster and R.K. was the start of what's come to be known as Slow T.V. and it's become kind of a thing which Thomas explained on the TED stage.  How did we get there.  We have to go back to two thousand and nine when one of my colleagues got a great idea where do you get your ideas in the lunchroom.  So he said why don't we make it radio program.  Marking the day of the German invasion of no way nine hundred forty we tell the story at the exact time during the night.  While brilliant idea except this was just a couple of weeks before the invasion day so we sat in the lunch room and discuss what other stories.  Can you tell as they evolve.  What other things takes really long time.  So one of us come up with the tray the Bergen weigh in way.  How did sundered us anniversary that year.  Goes from wrestling no way to eastern no way and if you say exactly the same time as it did forty years ago over seven hours and now we thought yes we have a brilliant program for the two thousand trainspotters you know when one point two million know we watched part of this program is not like a quarter of the population of Norway.  You know it's a good fifth or a quarter sensitive because it's so so so I think it's like when you if you really stretch the time at that and go deep into something it get more and more interesting the deeper you it into it and the network Thomas works for and R.K. has gone on to produce more slow T.V. like for national firewood night eight hours of a burning fireplace a show about fishing sudden fishing a big deal in Norway.  That was eighteen hours to eighteen hours of just fishing people fishing.  It took three hours before we got the first fish three quarters.  It was cut.  They've done knitting almost nine hours for national knitting night.  Yes a cover to cover performance of a book of Norwegian hymns for sixty hours and most ambitiously a boat cruise along a famous Norwegian shipping route after this.  So no interruptions no like late breaking news.  Nothing.  You know the five and a half days with the news the way they put everything else else away and gave us the Channel four four five minutes of us watching that boat leave the harbor and then sail for hours and hours and hours.  It's hard to remember.  But even though this is called Slow T.V. you're not watching something slow.  You're watching something real something happening exactly as it did and we are living in times when coherent it's stories and context is somehow exotic people are longing for some kind of connection or an unbroken story.  So today on the show slowing down a social scientist who says doing it can give you more original ideas a story about the lost art of letter writing and even a master procrastinator all with ideas about why taking it slow is hard but important for all of us people me both Slow T.V. They could this be done elsewhere in the world or our new age and particularly crazy.  And I don't think we are I think we have with the slow T.V. I don't something that react to a neat among people trying to tell a story in full length.  It can be window to the world and if you if you're going to train journey if you're going to both journey you experience in the same slow way and that's made me appreciate the slowness because it gives the viewer a possibility to take back some of the control.  You can watch all of to my Helms TED talk at TED dot com.  And in answer to whether Slow T.V. is just for Norwegians not anymore.  Norwegian Slow T.V. is now available on Netflix.  Why not take some time to check it out.  

On the show today we're talking about slowing down and this I can go as you wants is Adam Grant work in professor of medicine and psychology and author of give and take and original but you're not like a slowed guy at all like you're like the polar opposite of that I am I can't stand inefficiency and tend to do things as quickly as possible without compromising quality standards in fact Adam hates inefficiency.  So much that he's a self described pre-crastonater.  As in the opposite of procrastinator. Guilty as charged.  And what is that by the way. You know that panic you feel a couple hours before a big deadline you're behind? I feel that a few months before that big deadline.  What happens when you can't get something done like way in advance.  Like what happens to you.  I feel like I'm going to combust.  OK I read that you finished your college thesis four months before the deadline.  Yes. Your PhD finished it in in less than three years. And apparently tenured professor in your twenty's. Guilty.  These are not the signs of a person who belongs in a show called slowing down. Definitely the fish out of water.  

Interestingly Adam Grant has worked really hard to prove that slowing down even though it's harder for some of us than others can be really good especially when it comes to creativity.  It was heretical to me at first and yet you know I was subtle tenuously excited about the possibility of being wrong and also deeply disturbed by the implications of it on the TED stage.  Adam told a story that sparked this idea and it all started a few years ago when he was teaching a business class a student came to me and asked me to invest in his company.  He said I'm working with three friends and we're going to try to disrupt an industry by selling stuff on line.  And I said OK go spend the whole.  Summer on this right you know we all took internships just in case it doesn't work out.  All right.  But you're going to go in full time.  Once you graduate.  Not exactly we've all lined up back of jobs.  Six months go by.  It's the day before the company launches and there is still not a functioning website.  So I obviously declined to invest.  Yeah like all these things were signs that these guys weren't taking it very seriously.  You know it's like a little hobby.  It is a game you have this idea.  You know it's let's get around and see what happens and you felt like they're going pretty slowly like they were moving fast and I thought they were way too so I mean they came to me with the idea in August.  It's February the company is supposed to launch the next day they still do not have a functioning website and you know like I'm looking at them thinking the company is a Web site.  There's nothing else it's just a website and you haven't built that what have you been doing for the last six months? And it turns out they spent six months just are you about what they should name the company and I thought you know kind of unproductively considering over two thousand different names and like who cares what you name the company.  You need a website or else you don't have a company. And they ended up naming the company Warby Parker: they sell glasses online.  They were recently recognized as the world's most innovative company and valued at over a billion dollars And now my wife handles our investor.  

Why was I so wrong to find out.  I've been studying people that I come to call originals. Originals are non-conformists people who not only have new ideas but take action to champion them; they drive creativity and change in the world.  They're the people you want to bet on and they look nothing like I expected a few years ago I had a student named Jay.  Who came to me and said I have my most creative ideas when I'm procrastinating.  And I was like that's cute where the four papers you owe me know she was one of our most creative students and as an organizational psychologist this is the kind of idea that I test.  So I challenge her to get some data.  She goes into a bunch of companies she has people to fill out surveys about how often they procrastinate.  Then she gets the bosses to rate how creative an innovative they are and sure enough the pre-crastinators like me who rush in and do everything early are rated as less creative.  So I want to know what happens to the chronic procrastinators. She says "I don't know they didn't fill out my survey".  

There is this almost beautiful inverted-U where people who waited till the last minute like the chronic procrastinators, that they just had to rush ahead with their simplest idea because they didn't have enough time to work out the creative ones.  That the pre-crastinators like me were also less creative because you know we tended to rush ahead with our first ideas which are usually the most conventional and we also made mistake of you know thinking in very structured linear ways whereas people who started early and then put it away for a while and then came back to it.  They were much more likely to do divergent thinking in incubation and that actually boosted their creativity and we ran some experiments to show that in fact that forcing people to procrastinate or enticing them to procrastinate could boost their creativity as long as they didn't wait too long.  

Promo: Stamps.com
Adam Grant he'll be back in just a minute with the story of another experiment about the value of procrastination where he was the test subject and more ideas about slowing down.  I'm Guy Raz And you're listening to the TED Radio Hour from N.P.R. of one I just heard thanks to two of our sponsors who helped keep this podcast going first to Stamps dot com mailing and shipping can seem like a no win situation.  Try.  To the post office are time consuming and leasing a postage meter is expensive.  There is a better way Stamps dot com buy and print official US postage for any letter or package using your own computer sign up for stamps dot com for a special offer for our listeners a four week trial plus postage and a digital scale go to Stamps dot com click on the microphone and enter N.P.R. Thanks also to Whole Foods market this week Whole Foods Market is having sales but this week is really special because Whole Foods Market has sales every week and they put yellow stickers and signs all over the store.  So you can find the highest quality food at the best prices including meat and poultry from farmers and ranchers committed to quality and taste in organic produce grown without toxic pesticides to keep an eye out for yellow the next time you shop and visit Whole Foods Market dot com to see this week's specials.  

It's the TED Radio Hour from N.P.R. I'm Guy Raz And on the show today ideas about slowing down.  And just a minute ago we were hearing from business school professor Adam Grant described how a few years ago.  Some students in a class of his really opened his eyes to the value of procrastinating and taking the time to work through a new idea.  So he began studying people who came up with great new ideas and he called them originals.  Adam picks up the story from the TED stage.  

I was starting to write a book about originals and I thought this is the perfect time to teach myself to procrastinate while writing a chapter on procrastination.  So I met a procrastinator.  And like any self respecting pre-crastinator, I woke up early the next morning and I made a To Do list with steps on how to procrastinate.  And then I worked diligently toward my goal of not making progress toward my goal.  I started writing the procrastination chapter and one day I was halfway through and I literally put it away in mid-sentence for months.  It was agony, but when I came back to it.  I had all sorts of new ideas.  As Aaron Sorkin put it: "you call it procrastinating; I call it thinking." 

Along the way I discovered that a lot of great originals in history were procrastinators take Leonardo da Vinci he toiled on and off first sixteen years on the Mona Lisa.  He felt like a failure.  He wrote as much in his journal.  But some of the diversions he took in optics transformed the way they modeled light and made him into a much better painter.  What about Martin Luther King Jr The night before the biggest speech of his life, The March on Washington, he was up past 3 AM rewriting it.  He's sitting in the audience waiting for his turn to go on stage and he is still scribbling notes and crossing out lines. When he gets on stage, 11 minutes in, he leaves his prepared remarks to utter four words that change the course of history: "I have a dream".  That was not in the script. By delaying the task of finalizing the speech until the very last minute, he left himself open to the widest range of possible ideas.  And because the text wasn't set in stone, he had freedom to improvise.  

What happens while we incubate? 
Wow I had no idea he was writing that speech to the last minute.  So what happens in the period between when we put something away, let's say because we succumb to are the laziest parts of ourselves, what happens during that time?  How does it actually get gears in our brain working well?  

Very rarely are people lazy about everything all the time.  So what we look at is laziness is actually you know being discouraged by something being really difficult.  The psychologist Ian McGregor who has incredibly fascinating research on what he calls compensatory conviction, which is when you're facing serious uncertainty, what you do is start fleeing in a different direction and you develop all this passion for something else that helps you escape from the thing that you're trying to get out of your field of vision.  If you take that idea seriously, what often happens when we're putting things off for your procrastinating, you are pursuing other things that could potentially be combined with the things that you're putting off.  You end up testing out different kinds of ideas when you're trying to solve a different problem.  And then sometimes they end up feeding right back into the thing you're avoiding in the first place.  

Yeah I mean if you are constantly moving forward every single day without the opportunity to stop and just reflect or stop and do something completely different you're going to be limited.  You're going to be limited in what you're able to say or think. 

Garnic Effect?
The experience I had while writing was so revealing on this. I put off the chapter I couldn't get it worked out.  I came back to it and all of a sudden I remembered this research on this re-garnic effect.  You know almost a century ago this German psychologist wrote about how we have a better memory for incomplete than complete tasks.  So you finish something and you check it off your TODO list; it's erased. Whereas incomplete tasks, they have to stay active.  So that we don't have to redo them, we remember how to pick up where we left off.  It reduces getting-into time and all of a sudden I was like wait.  So this is what's going on when you put something off instead of finishing it, it stays partially active in the back of your mind and that allows you to keep going back to the well. Ironically, I left a task incomplete and then I remember there's a garnic effect about the benefits of leaving the task incomplete.  OK this is really annoying but I think that that is one of the things that really happens when you slow down is you keep it active in your working memory and it can be really good for the task that you haven't quite solved yet.  

Backup Plans
Adam says this is why truly original ideas are quick to start, but slow to finish.  They take time and the people behind those ideas often have a lot of doubts and often a back up plan in case the original idea doesn't work out 

And this is what I'd miss with Warby Parker.  They had backup plans lined up and that made me doubt that they had the courage to be original now on the surface a lot of Aboriginal people look off it.  But behind the scenes they feel the same fear and doubt that the rest of us do they just manage it differently now in my research I discovered there are two different kinds of doubt there's self doubt and idea that self-doubt is paralyzing it leads you to freeze.  But idea doubt is energizing it motivates you to test to experiment to refine just like M.L.K. did.  Instead of saying I'm crap you say the first few drafts are always crap and I'm just not there yet.  So how do you get there.  What about being the kind of person who takes the initiative to doubt the default and look for a better option.  And if you do that.  Well you open yourself up to the opposite of deja vu.  There's a name for it.  It's called vu-ja-de -- which is when you look at something you've seen many times before and all of a sudden see it with fresh eyes.  It's a screenwriter who looks at a movie script that can't get the green light for more than half a century.  In every past aversion the main character has been an evil queen.  But Jennifer Lee starts to question whether that makes threats.  She rewrites the first act, reinvents the villain as a tortured hero, and frozen becomes the most successful animated movie ever.  So there's a simple message from the story when you feel doubt, don't let it go.  What about fear?  Original's feel fear too.  They're afraid of failing but what sets them apart from the rest of us is that they're even more afraid of failing to try. They know you can fail by starting a business that goes bankrupt or by failing to start a business at all. They know that in the long run our biggest regrets are not our actions but our inaction the things we wish we could redo if you look at the science are the chances not taken. 

When do you know that the procrastination is productive and when do you know that it's just destructive? 
Tomorrow I hope.  I think that probably the easiest way to think about it is to say that procrastination can become creative when you've actively grappled with a problem and that's why I like the idea of being quick to start and slow to finish. Being quick at the beginning and trying to accelerate a little bit of progress as you're generating lots and lots of ideas and trying to do that at a rapid pace -- that's good.  And then, at that point, you want to slow down and give yourself access to lots of different, new insights and then move back into productivity mode and getting skilled at toggling between those two modes is probably what ultimately gets the best balance of creativity and productivity.  

Yeah I mean it makes a lot of sense but the world we live in today requires instant feedback because everyone seems to have that information available at their fingertips you know that we actually live in a much faster world than ever before and that trajectory is just moving in one direction. It'll be faster in twenty years and faster in forty years.  

Yeah I think that's a serious risk that we're facing is that the faster we move, the less carefully we tend to reflect on things. I think about it in some ways as the difference between being smart and being wise.  Being smart is all about the speed at which you can process complex information and you actually may get it right a lot of the time, but if you never take a step back and pause and ask what if what if this isn't true?  What if all my assumptions are going to be wrong and then you're end up winning a bunch of battles and losing a lot of wars.  

Adam Grant He teaches at the Wharton School of Business.  He wrote a book about this idea.  It's called the originals.  You can see his entire talk at TED dot com So for all of Adam Grant's research about procrastination and slowing down.  There's a right way to do it and they wrong way.  Can you introduce self pleased him.  Yeah 

Tim Urban
I'm Tim Urban Tim's a blogger His blog is called Wait, But why.  And Tim blogs on all kinds of topics the cool thing about that is I can kind of switch it up based on whatever I'm interested in.  And like any other job being a blogger comes with job responsibilities in fact Tim has a list posted on his website.  So my responsibilities are passionately underestimating how long each post will take to do pacing around in his underwear hitting himself that's one of my major responsibilities thinking if only I were doing that other topic it would be so much easier and you consider yourself to be a procrastinator right.  Yes a chronic troubled procrastinator Yes it's my core struggle the core struggle of your life.  Yes actually.  Tim started to blog about procrastination.  You know I've now done three posts across the nation.  And I've gotten more e-mails regarding those three posts than the other eighty post.  Combined.  Now one thing about these posts that seem to resonate with people is this visual Tim came up with to describe what goes on in his brain when he's procrastinating imagines these two cartoon characters fighting over control of his mental steering wheel and a picture inside your brain.  There is a wheel.  Like I always picture one of those wheels on the boats you know the big thing with a bunch of the Steamboat Willie wheelwright Yeah yeah yeah those big octopus wheels.  Yeah.  Here's Tim on the TED stage.  I want to explain to the number crass knitters of the world.  What goes on in the heads of procrastinators and why we are the way we are and I had a hypothesis that the brains of procrastinators are actually different than the brains of other people.  Both brains have a rational decision maker in them but the procrastinator's brain also has an instant gratification monkey.  What does this mean for the procrastinator Well this is the gratification monkey does not seem like a guy you want behind the wheel.  He lives entirely in the present moment he has no memory of the past.  No knowledge of the future and only cares about two things easy and fun.  Now we have another guy in our brain the rational decision maker who gives us the ability to do things.  No other animal can do we can visualize the future we can see the big picture we can make long term plans and he want to take all of that into account.  And he wants to just have us do whatever makes sense to be doing right now.  Now sometimes it makes sense to be doing things that are easy in fun like when you're having dinner or going to bed or enjoying well or in leisure time.  Sometimes they agree but other times it makes much more sense to be doing things that are harder and less pleasant for the sake of the big picture and that's when we have a conflict.  So the rational decision maker will make the rational decision to do something productive but the monkey doesn't lie.  That plan.  So he actually takes the wheel and he says.  Actually let's read the entire wicked P.T. page of the Nancy Kerrigan Tanya Harding scandal because I just remember that that happened then.  Then we're going to go over to the fridge receives anything new in there since ten minutes ago so I thought that's it.  I think that's an interesting look at Pedia page about Tonya Harding and then she Kerrigan Oh my God it's so intense.  It's amazing and lots of things to link hyperlink close riveting you know God So I read the whole thing and I want to read you know four other articles then I got into a whole Tonya Harding spiral rant about her husband who is an amazing character by the way and wrote about her husband her husband's associate this is the nightmare.  So I'm doing this and the whole time.  The Russian decision makers screaming at the top stop and he's saying books are you doing.  You have so much to do right now this is makes no sense and so it's so and so then me.  I'm actually having fun.  I'm really really upset.  While doing this.  It's insane behavior and it's the self-defeating kind of habit you will behavior it's a it's a habit to let the monkey kind of take over then how do you like ever get anything done as a progression later there's another character called the panic monster and the panic monster.  You know is dormant almost all the time but emerges in a frenzy when there are some external deadline because the only thing that scares the monkey The only thing you can overpower the monkeys the panic monster and this entire situation with the three characters this is the procrastinators system.  It's not pretty but in the end it works well.  Turns out that there's two kinds of procrastination.  And there's deadlines the effects for questioning or contain it to the short term because the panic monster gets involved but there's a second kind of procrastination that happens in situations when there is no deadline.  So if you want to have a career you want to be a self-starter something in the.  Something.  Entrepreneurial there's no deadlines on those things first.  There's also all kinds of important things outside of your career that don't involve any deadlines like seeing your family or exercising and taking care of your health now if the questioners only mechanism of doing these hard things is the panic monster that's a problem because in all of these non deadline situations the panic monster doesn't show up.  It's nothing to wake up for so the effects of procrastination they're not contained they just extend outward forever.  The monkeys sneakiest trick is when the deadlines aren't there.  So Adam Grant was saying that that this can actually be a good thing right.  And so I wonder whether slowing things down like you know procrastinating has has actually helped you out in a way yeah.  In a way it is the good part of a class they should for me in my particular line of work is the impulse to say well let's take a deep breath here and let's take our time I definitely go slowly as any reader of way but why I will tell you I do not come up with posts very quickly.  Sometimes I take ten weeks to come out with a blog post and it's thirty thousand words.  That's something but it's not really what a blog are supposed to do and so for me going slow is is an important part of what I do yeah I mean think about your like your blog has been pretty successful and the sort of conventional wisdom about the Internet as we go fast briefly click bait stuff and you get lots readers and you post you know whenever you can.  Oh yeah absolutely.  For me.  I mean I wasn't a good business plan to try to out Buzz Feed Buzz Feed You know they write a thousand articles a day I want to write two thousand articles a take that's obvious.  I have no chance of doing that and and I definitely believe that the ability of way but wired to gain a readership is directly tied to you know me spending sixty or eighty hours on every single post and they don't come out very often but when they do the qualities a parent's good parent someone spent a long time on the.  I mean that's a thing like I feel like you know the idea of slowing down even one when it takes a form of procrastination like has huge benefits.  Absolutely.  I think that for someone who wants to kind of really invent something that seems new or that seems you know that really seems fresh that takes emotional and mental toil over long periods of time it doesn't just happen but procrastination is different than slowing down.  Procrastination often forces you to slow down which is why it can be kind of an indirect asset.  So for me.  All I cared about when I came out of college was doing creative a creative pursuit of some kind.  Whether it was writing music or a writing and I didn't start doing you know one of those creative passions full time till I was thirty one that procrastination set me back nine years there.  So I think the answer isn't to be a procrastinator that's someone who's not in control of their own life.  The answer is to be in control to know that it's smart to slow down and to do that in a controlled intentional Timmerman His blog is called Wait but you can see his entire talk at TED dot com More ideas about slowing down in just a minute.  I'm Guy Raz And you're listening to the TED Radio Hour from N.P.R. And just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who help keep this podcast going first to the glue software they want you to know about their modern intranet it's designed to keep everyone on the same page.  Even if the team is half a world away with iglu you can share files have real conversations in real time and do it all while still being able to use the apps you currently use like Box Google Drive and Sky igloo brings everything together and creates a single destination the key.  To focus on your work.  Simply put igloo is an Internet.  You'll actually like try today it afterward dot com slash radio Our thanks also to rocket mortgage buy Quicken Loans they bring the mortgage process into the twenty first century with a completely online process safely share your bank statements and pay stubs with the touch of a button ditch the paperwork and use your phone or tablet to get approved for purchase or refinance with a custom mortgage solution in minutes.  Check out rock at mortgage today at Quicken Loans dot com slash ideas.  Jessica equal housing lender licensed in all fifty states and M.L.S. consumer access dot org number thirty thirty.  It's the TED Radio Hour from N.P.R. I'm Guy Raz came on the show today ideas about slowing down how to do it in a world that seems to be constantly speeding up and that was a question.  Andy had in his twenty's when he quit school and decided to become a Buddhist monk and when he spoke on the TED stage and he explained what happens when you don't give your mind a few moments.  Every day to take it just a little slower the result of course is that we get stressed.  You know the mind which is away like a washing machine going round and round lots of difficult confusing emotions and we miss out on the things that are most important to us and the crazy thing is that everybody just assumes Well that's the way life is so we just kind of got to get on with it.  That's really not how it has to be so I was about eleven when I went along to my first meditation class as I was there you know I guess like a lot of people I assumed it was just an aspirin for the mind to get stressed use in meditation and really thought that it could be sort of preventative in nature and so I was twenty when a number of things happened in my life in quite quick succession really serious things which just flipped my life upside down and.  All of a sudden I was inundated with thoughts inundated with difficult emotions that I didn't know how to cope with every time I sort of pushed one down another one would just sort of pop back up again.  It was a really very stressful time I guess we all deal with stress in different ways.  My own way of dealing with it was to become a monk.  So I quit my degree I headed off to the Himalayas.  I became a monk and I started studying meditation.  It taught me it gave me a greater appreciation and understanding for the present moment.  I think the present moment is so underrated.  There was a research paper that came out of Harvard just recently that said On average our minds are lost in thought almost forty seven percent of the time forty seven percent.  At the same time this sort of const The mind wandering is also a direct cause of unhappiness now and we're not here for that long anyway but to spend almost half of our life lost in thought and potentially quite unhappy.  There no just now.  It's kind of seems tragic actually especially when there's something we can do about it when there's a positive practical achievable scientifically proven technique which allows our mind to be more healthy to be more mindful and less distracted.  Now what usually happens when we learn to be mindful is that we get distracted by thought let's say this is an anxious thought so everything's going fine and then we see the anxious thought and didn't realise I was worried about that.  You go back to it.  Repeat it.  Oh I am worried or I really am worried.  Well it is so much anxiety and before we know it right.  We're anxious about feeling anxious.  You know this is crazy.  We do this all the time even on an every day kind of level if you think about the last time I don't know you had a wobbly tooth.  You know it's wobbly and you know that it hurts but what do you do every twenty thirty seconds.  And we reinforce the story line.  Right.  We just keep telling ourselves and we do it all the time it's only in learning to watch the mind in this way that we can start to let go of those storylines and patterns of mind but when you sit down and you watch the mind in this way you might see many different patterns you might find a mind that's really sort of restless and.  The whole time.  You know.  Don't be surprised if you feel a bit agitated in your body when you sit down to do nothing and your mind feels like that.  You might find the mind is very sort of dog boring and it's just almost mechanical if a source says if you're just getting up going to work eat sleep get up or it might just be that one thought that just goes round and round and round your mind.  Whatever it is meditation offers the opportunity.  The potential to step back and to get a different perspective to see the things aren't always as they appear.  You know we can't change every little thing that happens to us in life but we can change the way that we experience.  Thank you very much.  That's the way he co-founded a meditation app.  It's called headspace.  And you can see his entire Talk dot com and that the way could be especially useful if you're as busy as Lakshmi proud to go back and forth between the Bay Area and Bangalore me works in the Bay Area a lot but she still has family back in India where she runs a big conference every year.  Helen is a flight twenty four hours a day it would be better if it was faster wouldn't it.  I don't know.  You know sometimes I enjoy my quiet time on the plane for those twenty four hours.  I don't talk to.  Anybody.  Nobody can call me I can call anyone you know sort of separates me from all that crazy rush rush rush stuff that we do all the time.  Another way like me likes to slow down by writing letters as a try.  I feel like they are happening on this piece of paper.  Nobody else writes like that it's nobody else's signature it's only mine now Lakshmi didn't always feel this way back when she was in college.  Her father would send her letters every week.  Oh yeah you know he would mail them regularly to me.  I mean I lived in America.  My dad lived in India.  And every week he'd order that or to me.  I mean without fail but I was in my busy life working etc Nope see this letter and I go OK you know the letter to skim through it and put it away and but never really read them.  It was like OK dad he writes every week and some day I'll catch up with me did eventually catch up with all those letters from our father but it wasn't until many years later after he passed away and that's when she came to really understand what they meant.  Lakshmi explains more in her short TED talk.  My father left me a legacy of his handwriting through letters and a notebook.  In the last two years of his life when he was sick.  He filled a notebook with his thoughts about me.  He thought about my strengths weaknesses and gentle suggestions for improvement hoarding according specific incidence and held a mirror to my life.  After he died I realize that no one writes to me anymore.  Handwriting is a disappearing art.  I'm all for email and thinking while typing but why give up old habits for new.  Why can't we have a letter writing and.  Exchange in our lives.  There are times when I want to trade all those years that I was too busy to sit with my dad and chat with him and trade all those years for one hog.  But too late.  That's when I take out his letters.  And I read them.  And the paper that touched his hand is in mine and I feel connected to him.  So maybe we all need to leave our children with a value a legacy a not a financial one.  A value for things but the personal touch.  An autograph book a soul searching letter.  So what do I plan to leave for my son my own notebook.  You're talking is really kind of a parable for the lost art of writing by hand.  Right because we have to move so quickly right people send us e-mails and just expect to receive response right away very very quickly.  Right.  And yet there's something lost about immediate responses there's something a lot that we lose when we don't have time to reflect on what what it is we want to say and what meaning we want to give to the words that we commit to an e-mail.  Yes and also that is something about just waiting.  It's painful but also that is something absolutely beautiful about not knowing when that letter is going to come and that excitement when you would receive it.  I think you get things too easy to quick your expectations become more you know of course.  I do think sometimes that I've been fed too much of Indian movie and some of the manse the sense of waiting and longing and cetera but I just feel there's something magical about it to just wonder I mean what you know what that person instinct.  What's happening.  It's just that I have taken the time to write to you which is some of a very beautiful tree.  She's the C.E.O. of conferences.  You can see her entire Talk dot com on the show today ideas about slowing down and savoring the moment it's kind of funny because I speak very fast and I think my mind is very fast not in the sense that I'm very smart but that I move very quickly between topics a lot of the time.  This is Gabriel Garcia Colombo he might not sound like he particularly appreciate slowness.  But I make art work to encourage people to slow down our work is mostly video makes these installations designed to get people to stop and think and these are the installations can take place over anywhere from you know a minute to twenty five minute loop so you can't just pass by the know you can but I'm hoping that you don't there's a problem with the way most of us view art.  Now that we're not going to museums but when we see art.  We rush right by it or we end up seeing that art through our cell phone screens.  I mean I think we've all become collectors of media and so when people visit a museum now they see it just as another part of their collection and you've got this device that you're just you know you carry around with you sort of like a jar that you're collecting insects in so how do you make the world slow down for art explains from the TED stage.  Did you know that the human attention span is now only seconds because people look at art and galleries.  We're going to museum these days you'll notice something that people walk up to a painting or sculpture take a picture with their eyes on it and walk away and take another picture of the next next painting.  And to me that's not a really good way of looking at are your birthday or not but as an artist.  I'd rather spend time with and slow down your traditional paintings and so my work and take up to twenty minutes.  You never see the whole one of Gabriel's installations that works like this is called Tube and it's about our relationship with technology and it features one of those old T.V.'s you had in the eighty's.  And when you look at it there's static on the screen and every so often a small figure climbs out of the screen made out of static and walks around on top of the television.  OK So obviously people can't see this on the radio but in your talk you show a video of this and it's like a hologram projected on on top of that the T.V. set.  Yes It's as if the characters were like emerged from the screen itself and walks around and then another character will appear and these two characters walk around on top inside this little glass container on top of the T.V. and when they touch each other.  Shuts off the entire television screen it removes them from the from the world around them to really experience I've got to give a twenty minute time yet to see the whole thing you'd have to wait there for twenty minutes and really think about why these figures exist in the world and and also how does this relate to the form of the actual television itself and what am I saying about media and I just so these are questions that I'm hoping people will start to ask when they spend that much time with a piece that's really what you want you want to happen you people to be forced to kind of think the I want them to ask questions.  You know I think that I want them to think about how their life or relates to the piece as well in the past few years taken as art out of the museum and crowded the hectic places places where art is the last thing on people's minds like Fulton center a shopping mall and subway station in Manhattan that hundreds of thousands of people pass through every.  So Gabriel thought what better place to get people to slow down tame from this idea of walking around New York City streets and seeing these little interactive moments that you may miss everybody's missing all these great things that are happening right there's always little plays that are happening around New York.  So I came over this idea of shooting these tiny little scenes of New Yorkers these portraits of New Yorkers and super slow motion.  So I filmed over fifty people and this film center there's going to be fifty different screens that around the space that are showing advertisements usually but every ten minutes they're going to fade out in there to show video are so these takes are actually done over about two seconds or two second takes that are stretched out to thirty seconds.  It's going to be surrounded by these slow motion portraits.  So what did it look like in the subway.  It's fifty two different screens so it's this very very in the some of the screens are thirty feet tall and some of them are eighteen feet wide and some of them are just normal screens but the idea is that one moment.  They'll all go to this piece the exact same time and you're sort of in this under you know your mind being in an aquarium but with with people instead of fish.  So when you if you just pass it by looks like a static image but actually it's just a very slow moving yes is a very slow moving portrait we film at a thousand frames per second and what I love about is that you can see things at that speed that you can't see in your normal life.  And what's great about that is that for you know some of the dancers that we've filmed you can really see the way they move their bodies in a different way or even just their expressions on people's face.  I film these two older women.  That were good friends and they came dressed in sort of their beach outfits and at one point one just sprayed the other with a bottle of water and the reaction to her being sprayed is just very authentic and you can really see that you know the muscles in her face move and react to this scene in a way that you wouldn't even be able to notice it in real life.  So if you ever stood in Fulton station and just washed people respond to it.  Yeah and that's that's.  The best thing that I got out of this piece is watching people sort of on their phone walking through the station.  They look up first second and then there's a giant tattooed girl dressed as the Statue of Liberty in front of them and she flicks are lighter and it turns on very slow motion.  You see this flame burst on the screen and they stop and they look at it and they don't know what to think and if that just breaks them out of their their daily routine a little bit that will make you happy as an artist.  Yeah.  Do you work slowly.  Yes definitely.  For one of these artworks in terms of the process it takes me it can take me up to like two years to to develop just because of all the moving parts because of the moving not even just because of the technology but more because I want to get the idea right and all drew do a drawing you know now and then two years from now I'll revisit that drawing and look at it and redo it again and think about what it means to me and write down.  You know a bunch of brainstorming sheets on that drawing and and then maybe it will come out three years after that sometimes but I like to have things percolating in the back of my mind I find that I can reflect on things better when I have an idea that sits there for a while like it like a cheese by the way you speak pretty fast for a slow guy.  Well I didn't say I'm not a nervous person.  I think is my mind works in these loops and so I try to jump to the next loop really fast and sometimes that's why I have to stop myself in slow down and write some stuff down.  You know really looking at things in there and they're smaller form rather than trying to just find the next thing or to answer the next e-mail to get that done.  You know maybe it's not all about completing a task maybe it's about admiring something for a little bit.  Gabriel Garcia Colomba as an artist based in New York to find more of his TED talks at TED dot com And by the way his Fulton center installation has since closed but he plans to rotate it through other New York City subway stations soon and find out where you can see Gabriel's work.  We have a link at our website.  Ted at npr dot org.  Hey thanks for listening to our show on slowing down this week.  If you want to find out more about who is on it go to Ted npr dot org Our production staff at N.P.R. kluges Jeff Rogers Brad Bachman Megan Cain Eva Grant sons mission poor and K.C. Herman with help from Rachel Faulkner and you can our partners at TED are Chris Anderson Kelly stats old and Janet Leigh.  I'm Guy Raz And you've been listening to ideas worth spreading right here on the TED Radio Hour from N.P.R..  Hey everyone.  It's guy here we have an app at N.P.R. that we really like it's really great and we'd love for you to try it.  It's called N.P.R. one and you can use it to listen to N.P.R. News shows and podcasts and as you do it actually listens to you and figures out what you like best and then gives you more of that.  So you can download N.P.R. One Now try it out you can find it on your app store right now. 
