At this altitude I can clap for Africa and start shaking but it seems like a cybernetic organism living.  This episode is brought to you by headspace more than eighty percent of the people I have interviewed world class performers across the military entertainment sports and beyond all have some type of meditative practice.  I tried for years and years and failed miserably.  The key is making it simple and you can dramatically improve your life in just ten minutes a day in technology can help you.  This change comes through guided meditation and headspace is by far the most popular app for this purpose more than four million users.  It's meditation made simple.  So what I recommend is that you take this practice meditation which is rooted in thousands of years of tradition supported by thousands of scientific studies and try it for ten minutes a day for ten days.  That's all you need to do You could also check out the founder and he put it comes.  TED talk which has more than five point five million views his last name is P C O M B If you want to look that up.  But otherwise download the free head space app I have it on my phone and begin there take ten program for ten days of guided meditation completely free ten minutes a day that's all it takes you should give it a shot headspace dot com forward slash Tim Just go to headspace dot com forward slash Tim this episode is brought to you by wealth front and this is a very unique sponsor wealth front is a massively disruptive and a good way said it and forget it.  Investing service led by technologists from places like Apple and world famous investors.  It has exploded in popularity in the last two.  Years and they now have more than two and a half billion dollars under management in fact some of my very good friends investors in Silicon Valley have millions of their own money in wealth front.  So the question is why why it's so popular.  Why is it unique because you can get services previously reserved for the ultra wealthy but only pay pennies on the dollar for them and this is because they use smarter software instead of retail locations bloated sales teams etc and I'll come back to that a second.  I suggest you check out wealth front dot com forward slash Tim take the risk assessment quiz which only takes two to five minutes and they'll show you for free.  Exactly.  The portfolio they put you on.  And if you want to take their advice run with it.  Do it yourself you can do that or as I would You can set it and forget it.  And here's why.  The value of wealth is in the automation of habits and strategies that investors should be using on a regular basis but normally aren't great investing is a marathon not a sprint and little things that you may or may not be familiar with like automatic tax loss harvesting rebalancing your portfolio to cross more than ten asset classes and dividend reinvestment add up to very large amounts of money over a longer period of time wealth front as I mentioned since it's using software instead of retail locations etc can offer all of this at low cost that were previously completely impossible.  Right off the bat.  You never pay commissions or account fees for everything they charge point two five percent per year on assets above the first fifteen thousand which is managed for free if you use my link wealth dot com for them.  That is less than five dollars a month to invest a thirty thousand dollar account for instance.  Now normally when I have a sponsor on the show.  It's because I use them and recommend them in this case to a little different.  I don't use wells front yet because I'm not allowed to here's the deal.  They wanted to sponsor this podcast but because of as regulations companies that invest your money are not allowed to use client testimonials so I couldn't be a user and have them on the podcast.  But I've been so impressed by well front that I've invested a significant amount of my own money at least for me in the team in the.  Any itself.  So I am an investor and hope to soon use it as a client.  Now back to the recommendation.  As eighteen Farish a listener you'll get fifteen thousand dollars to manage for free if you decide to open an account but just start with seeing the portfolio that they would suggest for you take two minutes fill out their questionnaire at well front dot com forward slash him.  It's fast it's free.  There's no doubt that I can think of 

Greetings earthlings this is Tim Ferriss and welcome to another episode of the show where it is always or I should say.  Usually my job to deconstruct world class performers to tease out the habits routines tools favorite practices workouts books whatever it might be that they use that you can test that you can experiment with in your own life.  And this episode is going to be a round too highly anticipated with none other than Jacko WILLINK head and.  Jocko did his first interview with me which was the first interview he ever did and it took the Internet by storm.  Jocko will link at Jocko willing on Twitter.  Jack a podcast dot com is one of the scariest human beings imaginable lean two hundred thirty pounds black belt Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu used to tap out twenty Navy SEALs Perec at he is an intimidating and very intelligent person I've spent more time with him and the more time that I spend with him the more impressive.  He is to me he spent twenty years in the U.S. Navy and committed SEAL team three is task bruiser the most highly decorated special operations unit from the Iraq war upon returning to the U.S. Jacko served as the officer in charge of training for all West Coast SEAL teams designing and implementing some of the most challenging and realistic and perhaps psychotic training in the world.  His words not mine.  After retiring from the Navy.  He co-founded actual on front I think I'm getting the pronunciation right leadership and management consulting company and author.  The number one New York Times best seller which was introduced in way on my podcast extreme ownership which many of you have read.  He now discusses war leadership business jujitsu life.  You name it in his top rated podcast also to some really really good book reviews or commentary on things that are dark in some cases like the Milan massacre.  Jocko podcast check it out and without further ado we are going to tackle or I should say.  Jocko is going to tackle your most common most burning questions and he doesn't dodge.  So I hope you enjoy it as much as I did.  A 

Jocko Willink
Thanks Tim Thanks for having me on Appreciate it.  And thanks to everybody that submitted questions to try and get to as many as I can here.  All right the first one is from a guy by the name of Jeffrey McCloud and the question is how do you shut internal doubt down and negative chatter out of your head during critical must do moments.  How do you change emotional negative focus States when something or someone knocks you off focus.  First of all internal doubt is not necessarily a bad thing and I've said this before about fear of failure because the internal doubt that first of all it's a form of humility and obviously humility is a good thing and that internal doubt and that fear of failure is the thing that the thing that keeps you up at night preparing that's the thing that's not going to let you cut corners.  It's the thing that little voice that little voice.  It's inside your head.  It's whispering.  Again practice again do it again over and over again and that's the voice that says to do everything you can to be ready.  So I'm OK with that I'm OK with that little internal doubt.  But this doesn't mean that you lack confidence.  I mean as a matter of fact when you when you prepare correctly it when you have the discipline to prepare correctly then you will have confidence and that is definitely a good feeling to have because the all that negative chatter that you're talking about here is the deal with that every repetition of practice that you do every iteration of rehearsal that you complete every bit of study that you do and every drill that you do all that all that preparation is going to drown out the the negative chatter.  So you've got to prepare.  Now then we get to this piece here.  It was how do you change emotional negative focus States when something or someone knocks you off focus.  Well I think this is where it's important to have that ability to detach and.  It isn't like you're going to completely detach and not feel those things at all not going to make those emotions disappear and as I mean like you'd want them to disappear completely because those things are normal but what you have to do when you detach.  Is it's going to allow you to to see those emotions without negative focus and see it from a distance and then understand that they are there and then make sure that they don't overwhelm you.  In so.  Late like in your head you're going to be seeing.  Oh OK I see that that's that's some nervousness sneaking up on me.  Got it.  That's a good sign because that means.  My mind is focused and I'm in the game.  OK what's next.  Oh oh oh god i'm some negative thoughts.  OK those are normal and I got to know that things are going to go bad and that's fine.  How bad can they go what's the worst case scenario.  Worst case scenario is not that big of a deal.  I know I can handle the worst case scenario if it happens so what else what else is in my mind what else negative thought am I having.  What about those things that you can't control the things that you can't control and you're worried about those things.  Well you know what I can't control them.  I can't control them.  Why worry about them because the energy that you put into worrying about them actually cost you your effectiveness.  It's going to cut into the energy you should be putting towards achieving what you're trying to achieve so.  Focus on the things that you can control and make the things that you can control one hundred percent and the bottom line with all this with these negative thoughts.  If if I give everything I can say five preparers hard as I can if I practice much I can if I do ever her soul.  And I do everything I can and I still come up short.  Good I'm going to learn from it.  I'm going to get better.  So that's what I'm going to do with internal doubt I'm OK with that negative chatter.  I'm going to utilize it.  And I'm just going to detach a little bit to make sure I don't get drowned out in these emotional situations.  So just.  Get your head in the game and get after it done.  OK.  Next question next question comes from Will will get drawn and.  He says.  How does his love of state love and study of literature influences leadership skills.  What were some of the best books for developing his knowledge of leadership.  OK So the thing that I look for when I'm reading and when I'm reading or that includes everything and let's just talk about everything your books history books literature or even poetry and even like song lyrics everything trying to learn about human nature.  That's what I'm looking for in of course since since combat is like life and amplified and intensified.  Which is something we say all the time a lot of times the books that are about war give some of the best insight into human nature.  You know you're talking about the stress and the fear and the courage and the breaking points and the darkness of humanity and also the beauty of humanity in all those can be seen in their most extreme in their most obvious form in war and so a lot of books that I do read are about war and I have a ton of them and again they're not so much leadership books by definition is my fact I don't even know if I have any quote unquote leadership books but I got a ton of books that have taught me a ton about leadership and first and foremost.  And I said this on when I was on Tim's podcast for the first time about face by Colonel David Hackworth it's it's the only book about ever actually given to anyone.  And it's a big book and people people have bought it.  People on Twitter that have gone out and bought a book.  It's a seven hundred page book.  It is a big book.  It spans from the tail end of World War two through Korea Vietnam.  And a little bit opposed to Vietnam and it's a big book it's a career military guy and Colonel Hackworth was just just a just an incredible leader and you don't just get from that from the book when you when you learn about Hackworth if you start digging in here in one of the People's opinions are people loved him.  They're specially the people that worked for him loved him.  Now obviously he had some trouble up the chain of command at certain points but that's that's part of the you know that's part of being a dynamic leader I guess.  And he held his ground on some stuff so that book is just incredible book and it's got lessons learned on every page.  And you know I cover most of the books that I've read that have had a huge impact on me and where I'm covering them up on my podcast.  So.  Books like like with the old breed by Eugene sled sledge and beyond band of brothers by Dick Winters.  I remember the last war by a guy named Bob Hoffman another book by Hackworth called Steal My Soldier's Heart.  Book called platoon leader by Jim McDonough.  And another good one.  Another good Vietnam one the killing zone by Frederick downs.  In those books I mean you could just go on and on and again it's not always.  Clear that.  Oh here's the leadership principle.  Here's what you should be doing.  No it's not always clear like that but when you when you understand what people are going through emotionally and you start to get a glimpse at human nature and how people react in certain situations and how their egos flare up that's what makes these books good because it gives you something to as a gauge your frame of reference and.  I'm still reading all the time and I'm still learning still trying to get better and still trying to take what other people been through how they handled it what they did right.  What they did wrong mistakes they made trying to do they ever actually I think that's actually one of the things that has made my my podcast become popular because I look at these other people's experiences and I compare them with mine.  And it's just it's it's always I'm always learning and I think that when you look at I talk about the mistakes that I made and even even the book that I wrote with lave is it's certainly is it any kind of a chronicle of our triumphs.  I mean if anything it's the opposite many cases because much of the book is is about mistakes that we made in it's about things that we could have done better and lessons that we learned and I think that's why I think that's why it's why that book Extreme ownership is done.  Well because it's something you can learn from and I think people learn the most myself included when you fail so.  Read and read and read some more in pay attention to in my mind.  Pay attention to the details.  Not again not just the leadership but the human the human element the human interaction.  The glimpses into the core of human nature in the bigger bank you build of.  Seeing how humans react.  The more you know and then you take that and you overlay the experiences you read about over what's happening in your world and that's I think a key point is to actually think about how what you're reading applies to what's happening in your world and then you start to pay attention to human nature in your world and see that there's some underlying.  Some underlying force that makes people do what they do and the better you can understand that force of human nature the the better off.  You're going to be and the better job you're going to do as a leader to keep.  Next up I've got a guy here named Kip Mack a new me.  What would his advice be to young men and women who are no longer in the military but are still looking to contribute also Has he considered running for any public office position.  So if you were in the military and you got out either or you retired or you just did your time and you got out you know go out and put those skills that you got from the military put those skills to work with the the discipline the work ethic the leadership the ability to a tad to detach the ability to to instruct and there are industries and tell you work with businesses all the time now and there are industries that need you in fact I would tell you that most industries need people like you people like veterans.  And so find an industry that that you're interested in and go get busy and go get after it.  And make that your next mission and in.  If there's no industries that industry interest you.  Which is kind of hard to believe that you have no interest but if you don't.  Or if you're looking for something maybe that has more kind of internal meaning than go out and find a really good nonprofit organization that needs help because again they need the same thing they need people they need leaders the people that are disciplined they need people they need people with the skills that you have the skills that you learned in the military.  So go and put those to work.  And I will tell you that there's Do you know America as a whole needs leadership and so there's no reason that veterans like I said who who have a lot of those skills from being in the military and from being deployed overseas.  There's no reason that veterans should make up a big portion of leaders in the civilian sector.  So step up and get after one one last thing about that is there's a lot of companies and I work again.  I work with are all kinds of different companies all kinds of companies want to hire veterans they recognize that their success is based on the freedoms that they have so they want to pay back some out and so there are many many companies are are anxious and eager to hire veterans.  So get out there find which are interested and make it happen.  Now the other part is question as far as running for political office and.  I say this all the time.  This is kind of a canned answer.  I don't think I have the stomach for the corruption and the sly meanness of the whole thing not to mention just the complete loss of privacy and scheduling in the whole meeting of people that I don't like and having to be civil to them all think it's.  It's like I said I don't I don't think I have the stomach for it and I mean.  And I guess that perhaps at some point that feeling could be over ridden if things got bad enough you know I would definitely have a sense of duty in in I'm a very patriotic person and if the nation truly needed me then of course I would serve.  But until that time.  I'm going to go ahead and just steer clear of any political endeavors.  OK The next question is from Adrian Marquez.  And it says any considerations regarding being a pawn of the and he says industrial military conflicts and maybe means military industrial complex.  I'm not sure but what will go with that.  So again any considerations regarding being a pawn of the industrial military conflicts to serve the economic interests of U.S. corporations would he do it all over again the next part of the question is what's next.  Make up another excuse invade an African nation for resources.  So of course when you are serving in the US military you are you are serving at least you should be serving the interests of the United States of America.  Absolutely and imbedded in those interests.  There are absolutely.  The economic interests of American corporations.  And obviously the economic power of the United States is a key component of America's power and influence in the world and.  So yeah.  When you are a.  Terry member you could be considered a pawn in the military machine but the fact of the matter is I am I'm actually honored to have served as a so-called pawn pawn in that system and.  I will tell you this and I've said this before.  America is is far from perfect and we have committed some horrors in our history and even today we make mistakes in the world but when you travel the world and you see how much of the rest of the world lives.  How much they live in disarray.  Then you see the oppression and you see the poverty and you see the corruption and you see the abject violations of basic human rights then you realize how blessed or lucky or or maybe even spoiled.  We are to live in America and just to start let's just start with.  Let's start with possible tap water drinking water that we just in America we just have that here we have it everywhere any home any apartment.  Even the prison's you turn on the tap and you get good clean disease free drinking water and that is not the norm in the rest of the world and on top of that we have power that electricity going into just about every home.  That means just about every home has heat in the winter time and they have air conditioning in.  The summer time.  And let's just take it a little bit further that what about the access to the Internet the access to the Internet.  Here is widespread.  There's something like seventy percent of the adults in America have a smartphone seventy percent so.  Seventy percent so you can gain access to knowledge here on like any other time in human history and our our health care system.  I know it's not perfect but I'll tell you what.  If you view our healthcare system from a Third World hospital which often don't even have the simplest of medical gear.  You'd realize it might not be perfect but it's pretty damn good in and beyond that it's just like let's look at the food that's available.  Never mind starvation and malnutrition our issue in America is actually too much food and much of the world still has people literally starving to death in America offers an amazing opportunity to build and to create and to be what you want to be and to be who you want to be on like anywhere else in the world.  The ability to pursue happiness happiness and and all those things all of it is possible because of the on bridled individual freedom that America offers and you know what it's also possible because of the industry because.  Of the incredible corporations and businesses and individuals.  Because of people that took advantage of that freedom and worked their asses off to build this nation.  So to have been a pawn in that to have done.  My small share of work to allow this skin over whites in a whole brand of freedom to continue on.  I'm honored that I had the chance and would I do it all again.  You're damn right I would without question and then there's another piece of this question from Mr Marcus It says what's next.  Make up another excuse invade an African country or an African nation for resources.  Well luckily we have plenty of resources in our own nation and luckily for the rest of the world.  We have used those resources over and over and over again not to take but to give to give freedom to the slaves in our own country to defeat.  And destroy the brutal Nazi regime in Germany and free the people of France and much of Europe.  We used our resources to defeat Imperial Japan who was rampaging through Asia invading enslaving people with no sign of stopping we used our resources trying to stop the spread of communism in Asia.  And remember.  There when I'm talking about resources.  I'm not just talking about oil and steel and wood.  I'm talking about blood.  I'm talking about hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of thousands of American men and women that gave their lives in the cause of freedom in in what what resources.  Did we take when we paid with our blood.  We took nothing.  We took we took no resources from the Germans we help them rebuild into an economic superpower.  We took no resources from the Japanese we help them rebuild into an economic superpower the Japanese and the Germans both have some of the highest standards of living in the world.  We took nothing from career or Vietnam and we took nothing from Afghanistan and even Iraq.  We took nothing.  And we only gave and we continue to give in two thousand and fourteen.  The U.S. government gave forty three billion dollars in foreign aid and then there was another twenty five billion on top of that from America from religious organizations and universities and colleges and private voluntary organizations and even.  The big American corporations now like I said that doesn't mean that America is perfect far from it.  Far.  From it then our past is checkered with horrible mistakes that we've made as a nation we've caused massive hardships and incredible suffering but we also evolved and.  We have become a benevolent nation a good nation and I know this because I saw it with my own two eyes I saw the people of Iraq who wanted freedom from the tyranny of Saddam Hussein who then wanted protection from the violent terrorist extremists who cheered us in the streets when we killed insurgents who wept when we left them.  And unfortunately who were murdered when we abandoned them because the politics in our own country.  They wanted us in Iraq the people of Iraq the normal citizens they wanted our protection and they wanted our positivity and they wanted freedom like much of the world does and I was honored to have done my small part to provide the opportunity for freedom around the world and to protect that precious freedom which is.  All too often taken for granted here at home.  Now the next question.  The next question.  News from someone named Dawn Ryan.  And he says What's the hardest thing you've ever gone through and what do you for see as the toughest thing on the horizon.  Eland door.  Well the hardest thing I've ever gone through is losing my men in combat and when I say my men but they weren't my men they were my friends.  And they were my brothers room barring the loss of many members of my direct family but I don't think I'll ever have to endure anything as soul crushing and devastating resolution my friend to combat next question.  This is from Nathan lo.  What advice would you give an active duty Navy SEAL or other military personnel following the election if Hillary is elected or if Trump is elected.  Well the fact the matter is either Hillary or Trump will be elected and the seals just like the rest of the military will do what the military always does and what they are sworn to do and if you don't know what that is I wrote down.  Down here the old of enlistment and I'll read it to you.  So you know what it's what it says it says I do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies foreign and domestic that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same and that I will obey the orders of the president of the United States and the orders of the officers appointed over me.  According to the regulations and Uniform Code of Military Justice.  So help me God.  So that's the that's the oath that you swear to when you join the military you're going to obey those orders now there is a little bit of a caviar and that is in the Uniform Code of Military Justice.  Article ninety two.  Because it gets a little bit more specific the articles and titled Failure to obey a order or regulation Any person subject to this chapter who number one violates or fails to obey any lawful general order or regulation to having knowledge of any other lawful order issued by any member of the Armed Forces which it is his duty to obey fails to obey the order or his derelict in the performance of his duties shall be punished as court martial may direct So the key word there is a lawful order and they made this perfectly clear during the Nuremberg trials.  When the Nazi war criminals claim that they were just following orders.  Well in America that doesn't cut it.  Jav to be lawful orders.  So regardless if Hillary Clinton Donald Trump Obama Bush Nixon J.F.K. or Reagan It doesn't matter the military will carry out the lawful orders of the president and the.  So that next question is from A.J. Nystrom he says.  Jocko in your book you speak about leadership down and up the chain of command.  What in your opinion experience is the most effective way to get leadership up the chain to wake up and break the cycle of rubber stamping ineffective practices especially in law enforcement.  So this is a big question and I'll tell you first things first.  The first thing you have to do is be awesome.  That's what you got to do seriously.  You've got to be the best police officer you can be and this goes for any job you've got to build the best possible reputation and that means you've got to follow the rules even the stupidity in consequential rules.  All of them become the front runner the top dog now that doesn't mean you become the loud mouth or the attention grabber.  But you become the best legit police officer you can possibly be and not only is this going to build your reputation.  It's also going to start to build your relationships up the chain of command and that's what you're trying to do.  You're trying to build some relationships here.  And the reason for that is you need to build up the capital the leadership capital the respect capital.  So that you can ask some legitimate questions and when the time comes you go and you ask those questions.  You know actually I I shouldn't say ask questions because that gives them a set up to provide you with the answers and you already know the answers and you don't agree with so instead of asking questions you take the reputation that you built as a bad ass and you raise points and when you raise points you have solutions and you have.  Solutions that you've already socialized with the team that you've already maybe even tested or you've at least tried in other words these are solutions that you know are going to work and also.  Pick your battles.  Pick your battles.  You've got to you're going to have to eat some stupid stuff you're going to do some lame things but you've got to pick your battles.  You're not going to be able to change everything.  So you've got to pick the most impactful issues to deal with and the other ones just.  You support those and you follow those like a good soldier because that gives you more capital.  When you do raise issues and and here's the other piece when you raise issues up the chain of command and this is a piece that people mess this up all the time when you raise these points up the chain of command and when you give the solutions.  You have to do it from a point of humility.  You can't be looking for the credit you can't be looking for the Attaboy.  You've got a calm across and you've got to not just come across.  You've got actually be law humble person putting forth some suggestions on how to do things better in O.T. the to the absolute black belt move is when you get them to think that.  It's their idea and that they came up with it and that they've made up that solution.  That's the ultimate blackbelt move.  That's what you're looking to achieve and that is how you win and that is what I did with my career I worked as hard as I could I followed everything they told me but when something stood out I was able to attack it address it and get the problem solved or changed because I had built up that capital so.  Build your reputation build your relationships build invent your ideal and your solution.  And then present it with humility next question is from a guy named Jonathan.  Mule.  How would his lifestyle of extreme discipline translate to someone living a seemingly unrelated life artists writers except who might find more productivity in pockets of leisure war late at night now.  I would argue that in these creative pursuits you actually require even more discipline and I would venture to guess that the biggest reason that creative types people in creative industries they with the reason that they don't produce isn't because they don't have vision and it's not because they don't have talent.  I can just about guarantee that in most cases.  It's a lack of discipline.  I I'm always saying about about working out.  I'm always saying that the weights in the gym aren't going to lift themselves.  You've got to go lift them.  Well it's the same thing with a book that book isn't going to write itself.  You got to write it in the painting isn't going to pain itself you've got a pain it and if you don't feel like writing or drawing or painting or composing that doesn't matter you do it anyways you.  Grit down and you force the words onto the paper or you force the brush onto the paper or you force the notes out of the instrument that's what you have to do you have to make it happen.  You have to force yourself to do it.  And it's not always going to be good and you might go back.  You might write a thousand words and you might delete nine hundred fifty of them but you've got fifty words fifty words that you didn't have before fifty words that you've created that are solid fifty words closer to reaching your goal.  Now as far as the time of day goes to me it doesn't matter if you have some kind of time of day were things seem to flow better or whatever great take advantage of it.  I think.  I think people think because I wake up early which I do that.  I believe that everyone must do that but honestly it's that's not true.  It's the principle it's it's about the principle.  Not about the specific time and I'm going to throw a big butt on that because although you can you can maybe work at different times.  Or maybe you stay up later maybe do better work at two o'clock in the morning or three o'clock in the morning and see there's no way you're getting up at four thirty.  That's OK but that doesn't mean over sleep it doesn't mean procrastinate it doesn't mean hit the snooze button and it doesn't mean staying up late diving into the depths of useless You Tube videos in claim that that is you being creative do not lie to yourself.  There's a decent chance.  That being creative is actually being lazy in your mind do not do not fall into that trap and I'll tell you something else in order to gain skills in order to master your craft any craft you have to practice.  You have to practice a.  And practice and practice over and over and over again and again and that requires discipline that requires discipline that is another example of how discipline will equal freedom.  The more you practice your craft the better you get at it the more freedom you have to create so build.  The structure and follow it put the discipline.  Into your life and the discipline.  It will increase your skills and it will increase your productivity.  And the discipline will get will set you free.  Now.  Going on to the next question here.  Will the muster event.  Oh sorry this is from Marco Lopez Marco Lopez Will the muster event be a once a year thing only after working with and training so many different companies are there any repeating patterns or common weaknesses that business owners seem to need to work on and it also says Will you please encourage Jocko to do.  No other Joe Rogan podcast.  So write on Joe Joe knows I'm standing by.  We'll we'll make it happen at some point you know.  Great to be on his show.  We're just people are just now getting around around to to with with him.  So maybe Joe's around the corner.  So we'll have to wait and see on that one.  All right to get to the question here for those who don't know the extreme ownership musters a leadership event that we're having in in San Diego California I'm doing it with with my business partner the co-author of the book Extreme ownership Babbin who is a seal that.  I worked with for many years and my brother and we're told this thing in San Diego California on October twentieth and twenty first and what the event.  It is it's going to be about combat leadership that's what's going to be about it's going to be a combat leadership and we're going to teach the fundamental principles of combat leadership and how to apply them on the battlefield in business and in life.  All three and they're all going to see when you come.  You can see how all three of the applications are the same these fundamental combat leadership principles they don't change regardless of whether you're out hunting down bad guys or whether you're hunting for a sale.  They don't change and their response to the event has been it's been awesome.  And we've got a ton of people coming to it which likely means it looks like we're going to do another event possibly We've got a car of the time out of the schedule but it looks like possibly the spring of two thousand and seventeen likely going to be somewhere on the East Coast.  It's going to be somewhere on the East Coast.  There's probably a pretty good chance.  We'll be looking at New York City not set in stone that we're going to do it not set in stone.  When we're going to do it.  We might wait another year.  I don't know yet.  It's just up in the air we have so much stuff on our plate right now that we've got to figure out if we can fit it in but if we do it again.  Maybe we'll head out to the east coast and you know New York City.  Get some now the next part of the question is are there any repeating patterns or common weaknesses that business owners need to work on.  And the answer is yes absolutely.  There are and we see the same issues from company to company and from Leader Leader and the same issues that we see in the civilian sector are the same issues that we saw while we were working with Seal petunias in training symptoms.  And the core problems that we see or what we wrote about in the book Extreme ownership that's one of the reasons we wrote the book was because we'd work with these companies people that you have the stuff written down anywhere and eventually wrote.  Down.  Now what are some of those issues that we run into mean you've got departments and divisions that aren't working together to cover move you've got communications not being made in a simple clear concise manner.  You've got either too much micromanagement which leaves the troops to take no initiative or you've got not enough guidance and the troops now don't know which direction to head into or you get a company that's trying to take on too many projects or too many initiatives at the same time they don't prioritize and execute so they end up getting none of them done and and then the obviously the most impactful one is when you have leaders and team members taking ownership real ownership extreme ownership of everything in a world.  To make sure that problems get on covered and owned and resolved because if leaders and members of the team if they don't take ownership of the problems then guess who solves the problems.  Nobody.  So these are all.  Again these are our fundamental problems that I saw when I was training SEAL platoon and it's the same thing I see now is the same solutions that we apply to these same problems learning the tactics.  The fundamental tactics of leadership is is what we get down to and will see at the muster.  All right.  Next this next question is from Damian Hudson.  What does Jocko struggle with or maybe better to say what is he at work on he comes across bulletproof.  And just pushes through on everything would like to know his method for identifying wheat.  Misses and putting structures in place to resolve correct improve would like to know his approach for his personal challenges.  Well first of all I can assure you that I am far from bulletproof in when you ask what I struggle with what I struggle with everything.  I mean I'm not naturally gifted at pretty much anything.  I'm not naturally strong I'm not naturally fast.  Certainly not the sharpest tool in the shed and so I constantly have to work on my weaknesses and if you want to know what my weaknesses are.  There's we don't have enough time on the pod casts to list all my weaknesses and he just does the way it is now as far as my method for identifying weaknesses it's pretty simple.  I'm constantly doing self assessment in detaching and looking at what I'm doing and what I can do better and I ask people that are close to me people that I trust ask them if they have any feedback for me Ask them if anything I could do better or where I can improve.  So that's pretty simple do a self assessment ask other people and find out what your weaknesses are what you could do better and 

What structures do you put in place to resolve, correct, and improve?
then the next part of the question is what do I do to put structures in place to resolve correct and improve.  

Well I just attack those problems. Weakness identified? Roger, attack the weakness. Problem identified?  Roger, attack the problem. I'll tell you I'm not a guy that spends a bunch of time over analyzing or over planning or diving deep into meditation on how I'm going to attack a problem.  I simply attack the problem.  Now that doesn't mean that I blindly attacking it doesn't mean that I hold a course without checking on my progress as I attack a problem.  I'm going to continually assess and make sure that I'm on the right course -- that I'm heading in the right direction and I'm making sure that it's the most efficient path and I will absolutely change course if I see something I can do better. Because I have that kind of attitude, it allows me to move quickly to execute and then initiate change and alter the course as I go if it's needed. Then it's the same attitude that I had when I was in the SEAL teams I could be very decisive very quickly because the decisions themselves did not close my mind the decisions did not close my mind I would make a decision and I would continue to reassess and readjust as needed but also as we moved forward towards a solution.  So you got a problem?  Step one Identify the problem.  Step two attack it.  Step three reassess and adjust and keep attacking get that thing solved.  

Next question is from Chris Bell 
How to stay motivated when every day is a struggle to accomplish goals?  
I can tell you very easily.  This isn't about motivation and accomplishing your goals. It's not about motivation; it's about discipline.  I already talked about that once a day and I would say begin to cry talked about it more the less talked about a bunch I talk about all the time it is about discipline.  Motivation comes and goes.  You think about motivation: you let a simple thing as being hungry can sap your motivation.  That's ridiculous.  You can't rely on that.  You have low blood sugar and are not motivated any more.  I didn't get enough caffeine; I'm not motivated. Wrong answer; motivation is unreliable and when you're counting on motivation to get your goals accomplished, you're likely going to fall short.  So don't count on motivation.  Count all on discipline.  You know what you have to do go make yourself do it.  Make yourself do it every week without some kind of magic pill or some.  Life curse something that a limit.  Nates the need to do the work well I will tell you what you need to do the work you gotta hold the line.  You gotta make it happen.  Yourself you have to make it happen.  It's not going to happen on its own you have to make it happen so diggin find the discipline be the discipline and accomplish the goal period.  That's it.  

In our next question is from Austin Farley.  And he said best advice to today's active duty force.  Regardless of branch about career oversight deployments differences between all sorts servicemembers OK So the basic question Is Best Advice.  Well the advice.  Besides be aggressive and stay safe.  That's my number one.  I would tell you for me the biggest component for success in the military is in my opinion is to do a great job in whatever you're doing and I know that sounds pretty obvious but I'll tell you I saw a lot of guys over the years who were always looking for the next ticket to punch or the next good deal or the next job that they had to get to take to make a promotional whatever and for me for the most part I just took what they gave me and I did the best I could at it in I'll tell you not only did this keep the Navy happy because the Navy you know they had a trooper that was getting after at.  It also kept me happy because I wasn't sweating the promotion or the evaluations or any the political stuff I was just.  I was getting after it to the best of my ability and if you do that our I in my opinion if you do that your career will take care of itself.  You'll get the good jobs because people would want you in those good jobs and the other thing I would say is this a big piece of being in the military is a gut check this hard work.  It's either too hot or too cold.  It's not enough food.  It's not enough sleep it's not enough water it's up and wait.  It's planned for months to do nothing and then don't plan at all to do something for months and then on top of all that you throw all the politics and the egos and the bureaucracy.  And when you mix all that together it can be pretty miserable but I will tell you this all that misery relish it British every moment of it because those hard things those rough things.  Those are a part of the experience of the military and it's experiences like that.  I promise you will for some twisted reason you will miss them when you leave.  So don't hate them don't avoid them and dive into them and kick them in the ass with a smile on your face because another thing is that smiles contagious and you elevate the morale of your whole unit.  When you wear it out.  So have fun and.  Kick ass at what you're doing and for those of you out there on the frontlines.  Like I said to be aggressive the best way to mitigate risk on the battlefield is to be aggressive Do not be reactive step up and get after it and by the way tell you active duty folks.  Thank you for what you're doing and for the vets that are listening.  Thank you for what you did.  Next up I got a question from Paul went to kick in.  It says unfortunately this is to Tim I guess.  Unfortunately you Rogan and Harris all pussyfooted around him.  I realize he's probably in to an intimidating presence but ask him how he feels about killing people especially possibly innocents and don't let him use the doing my job bad guys collateral damage narratives ask him how he feels about it.  He's intelligent enough to cope with being pressed for an authentic answer.  So Paul wants to know about killing people and possibly killing innocent people and what.  That's how I feel about that.  So first of all the Nature of War is death.  The nature of war is is killing that is what war is and of course there's all kinds of other components to war.  There's economic and cultural and diplomatic and strategic but at its fundamental core.  Or is about death and war is about killing and in the question here.  I'm told I'm not allowed to use the narrative of doing my job but there is a reason why that narrative exists because death and killing actually is the job of a soldier and we train for that job and when the time comes we do our job and we are good with it now.  Part of that comes from the training and part of that also comes from the dehumanization of the enemy.  Yes.  That is a true statement.  The enemy becomes dehumanised to the soldier.  That's one of the reasons why soldiers are generally OK with it and in the past the military had to help that process along they had to help the soldier D. humanize the enemy and it still does do that to some extent but I think in the wars that we are in now.  We don't need any help human izing the enemy the enemy.  De humanizes himself.  You see we in the military we witness what they do we see what they do we see the results of the torture and the rape and the murder.  We see families be headed.  We see people skinned alive.  We see young people kids.  Kids forced to carry out suicide bombings then now with the Internet in action.  The whole world can see the completely despicable and brutal behavior of these subhuman savages burning people alive for rowing people from buildings drowning people in cages ten year old sex slaves.  It's absolutely disgusting and abhorrent and I will tell you that I have no problem whatsoever killing all of these vile creatures all the of them now.  You also ask about killing innocents killing innocent people and as I already stated the nature of war is death and in war innocent people sometimes are killed then you want to know how I feel about it.  Well it is horrible.  It is horrible.  It is awful.  When it does occur.  And yes it does occur then let me tell you that America goes through great lengths extreme lengths and in doing so we incurred incredible risk to prevent killing innocent people on the battlefield.  When I fought with the one one A.D. in the bow Ramadi in two thousand and six the anti.  Your strategy the entire strategy was developed to minimize not only the killing of innocent people but also to minimize the amount of infrastructure that was destroyed.  So the buildings in the power of the water all that and again.  American troops took incredible risks incredible risks to mitigate the risk to civilians but war is messy war is confusing war is imperfect war is hell and despite all the efforts that we made despite all the good intentions and the precautions in the planning sometimes innocent people are killed and it's horrible pants horrible for the family of the slain and it's horrible for the military man that pulled the trigger or drop the bomb or through their grenade.  It's horrible for the mission because in places like Iraq and Afghanistan we are there to protect the local populace so it takes us backwards strategically as we try to win the hearts and minds of the people.  But you know what it doesn't.  Defeat us.  It doesn't beat us and it doesn't even turn the local populace against us and I'm speaking now from my experience in the Ballo Ramadi and let it be perfectly clear that the local population in Ramadi.  Absolutely.  Wanted us there.  They wanted us on the ground in their neighborhoods they wanted us to help them get rid of the insurgents that were terrorizing them literally terrorizing them.  And when innocent people were killed for whatever reason we apologized and we did what we could to help and we met and we broke bread and we explained what had gone wrong and we asked what we could do to help and we paid them money and we helped them repair their buildings.  We did what every we could and I will tell you in this never gets represented in the press but most of the time the local populace they understood the understood it was a war they understood it was a war against evil and they understood that that meant violence then they understood that in our efforts to help them get rid of the cancer that ravaged their city.  Well they understood that there would be bloodshed in removing that cancer.  War is hell it is best to be avoided at all costs.  So that innocent lives are not lost but.  Sometimes war cannot be avoided and sometimes war should not be avoided.  Sometimes in order to protect the innocents war is the only choice.  And I am thankful that there are men and women in the military that have the courage.  And the strength and the moral fortitude to stand up and face evil and to also withstand the awful burden of killing and of death.  No I think this is the last question here this question came from.  Andy.  Vasily it says what are the biggest lessons learned from jujitsu.  That transcend the art of fighting itself and can be applied to being an effective leader.  So I am a practitioner of jujitsu and it is a pretty incredible to pretty incredible thing to train there and for those either train jujitsu you know what I'm talking about for those either don't train jujitsu go train jujitsu because there's so much to be learned from jujitsu about leadership and about why for mean for instance I talked about discipline a lot today in jujitsu you're going to learn about discipline because it takes discipline to get on the mat day after day week after week month after month year after year and you won't always feel like training as fun as it is there can be days you don't feel like training but you have to find the discipline and you have to do it.  So you're going to learn about discipline and you're also going to learn about humility.  Because in jujitsu you will get humbled you will get beat by people that are smaller than you and weaker than you and they will smash you they will literally submits you and that is.  Ambling and there is no escaping it in those.  Those are very important because.  Like I said I've said this before.  Is that those are lessons that some traditional martial arts would try and teach you almost as theoretical lessons you know like you you must be disciplined they'll tell you that in theory but in jitsu Like I said without without discipline there's no there's no progress then in a traditional martial art they'll say oh you know you must be humble but like I said in jujitsu you actually get humbled so jujitsu teaches you a lot about life.  That's one of the things that make it's so powerful and it has the question back to the question was What does it teach you about leadership.  It absolutely teaches you some key things about leadership.  I'll give you a couple of the most important elements.  First of all detachment in of mention this word a couple times today in jujitsu I'll tell you right now if you let your star self start to get frustrated or you let yourself start to get angry or just emotional in general you will start to make bad decisions and when you start to make bad decisions that is the beginning of the end.  So you have to be able to detach from that emotion that frustration and you got to focus on doing the right thing at the right time.  It's absolutely necessary.  And that's the sane thing in a combat leadership position or in any leadership situation.  You cannot get caught up in all the chaos and all the mayhem.  You can't let your emotions get ahold of you.  So you have to be able to get attached from that you have to be able to step back and breathe and see the full picture of what is happening without the cloud of emotion and all that mayhem obscure.  Airing your vision so that you can make good decisions in jujitsu will teach you to do that now another piece of jitsu that transfers directly into into the leadership is the ideal of indirect warfare.  Right.  So in jujitsu the whole premise is to attack the weaknesses of your opponent.  You don't want to act their strengths.  You want to attack.  I mean just fundamentally you you attack the weak areas of their body like the joints or the neck you're not attacking the strongest parts of their body and.  If you attack where your opponent is strong.  So if you have a devout opponent that's very good at defending one type of one position or one type of hold you're going to wear yourself out as if you're attacking that eventually are going to run on energy and they're going to get the advantage.  So you can't just attack the strengths you have to attack the weak points in jujitsu and on top of that you also have to distract your opponent and you have to make them defend some area.  So you might maybe attack one area so that they put their defenses there but it's just a feint because what you really can do is you can go in attack an area where they're not defending you're going to attack their weak areas and it's the same thing with leadership and a clue the clearest example of where this is directly seen in leadership is when you're dealing with people's egos.  So you take a person that has a big strong ego.  You don't attack that ego head on that will just make that person get or if you attack their ego.  They're going to get defensive immediate Now you've built up now you have a even harder fight.  So what you do is you bypass their ego maybe you even massage their ego a little bit so that they let down their guard.  So that they let you into their head a little bit and then tactically and quietly.  Yes sneak it in you plant the seeds of what you're trying to get them to do where you're trying to lead them and soon off without seeing it.  Those seeds are going to grow and your idea and your playing and your leadership comes to fruition and that is in direct warfare and it's the same thing in jujitsu it's the same thing in business and it's actually the same thing on the battlefield as well we don't attack enemy strengths.  Unless it cannot be avoided.  So take up that jujitsu.  Start training and apply those lessons across the board in your life.  And I think that's I think that's it for questions for now thanks to everybody for listening in.  Thanks.  Of course to Mr Mr Tim Ferriss for having me on Tim has been for those who don't know he's been a huge supporter.  Since I met him and I really appreciate him everything you've done for me.  And everything that's kind of stem from that has been has been awesome the interaction from everybody through social media and Twitter and Facebook and all that and everyone that's listening and giving me feedback on on the podcast that I have in the book.  That I wrote with my buddy Les for and it's just awesome to connect with so many people and it's awesome to know that are so many people that are in the game so many people that want to get after it just like me looking to get better looking to do better looking to be better.  So.  Thanks to everybody for everything and like I said especially thanks to Tim for.  For kicking this whole thing off.  So until next time.  This is Jocko.  This is Tim again just a few more things before you take off.  Number one this is five bullet Friday.  Do you want to get a short email from me and would you enjoy getting a short email from me every Friday that provides a little morsel of fun before the weekend and five of Fridays a very short email where I share the coolest things I've found or that I've been pondering over the week that could include favorite new albums that I've discovered it could include gizmos and gadgets and all sorts of weird shit that I've somehow dug up in the world of the esoteric as I do it could include it.  Favorite articles that I have read and that I've shared with my close friends.  For instance And it's very short it's just a little tiny bite of goodness.  Before you head off for the weekend.  So if you want to receive that check it out just go to for our Work Week dot com That's four Hour Work Week dot com all spelled out and just drop in your e-mail and you'll get the very next one.  And if you sign up.  I hope you enjoyed this episode is brought to you by wealth front and this is a very unique sponsor is a massively disruptive and a good way said it and forget it.  Investing service led by technologists from places like Apple and world famous investors.  It has exploded in popularity in the last two years and they now have more than two and a half billion dollars under management in fact some of my very good friends investors in Silicon Valley have millions of their own money in well for it so the question is why why it's so popular.  Why is it unique because you can get services previously reserved for the ultra wealthy but only pay pennies on the dollar for that.  And this is because they use smarter software instead of retail locations loaded sales teams etc and I'll come back to that a second.  I suggest you check out wealth from thought come forward.  Tim take the risk assessment quiz which only takes two to five minutes and they'll show you for free.  Exactly.  The portfolio they put you on.  And if you want to take their advice run with it.  Do it yourself you.  Can do that or as I would You can set it and forget it.  Here's why the value of wealth is in the automation of habits and strategies that investors should be using on a regular basis but normally aren't great investing is a marathon not a sprint and little things that you may or may not be familiar with like automatic tax loss harvesting rebalancing your portfolio to cross more of the ten asset classes and dividend reinvestment add up to very large amounts of money over a longer period of time wealth front as I mentioned since it's using software instead of retail locations etc I can offer all of this at low cost that were previously completely impossible right off the bat.  You never pay commissions or account fees for everything they charge point two five percent per year on assets above the first fifteen thousand which is managed for free if you use my like wealth from dot com for him.  That is less than five dollars a month to invest a thirty thousand dollar account for instance.  Now normally when I have a sponsor on the show.  It's because I use them and recommend them in this case it's a little different.  I don't use wells front.  Yes because I'm not allowed to here's the deal.  They wanted to sponsor this podcast but because of S.C.C. regulations companies that invest your money are not allowed to use client testimonials so I couldn't be a user and have them on the podcast.  But I've been so impressed by well front that I've invested a significant amount of my own money at least for me in the team and the company itself.  So I am an investor and hope to soon need to use it as a client.  Now back to the recommendation is eighteen Farah show listener you'll get fifteen thousand dollars for free if you decide to open an account but just start seeing the portfolio.  They would suggest you take two minutes fill out their questionnaire at wealth front dot com forward slash Tim It's fast it's free.  There's no downside that I can think of this episode is brought to you by headspace more than eighty percent of the people I have interviewed world class performers across the military entertainment sports and beyond all have some type of meditative practice.  I tried for years and years and feel.  Miserably.  The key is making it simple and you can dramatically improve your life in just ten minutes a day in technology can help you.  This change comes through guided meditation and headspace is by far the most popular app for this purpose more than four million users.  It's meditation made simple.  So what I recommend is that you take this practice meditation which is thousands of years of tradition supported by thousands of scientific studies and try it for ten minutes a day for ten days.  That's all you need to do You could also check out the founder and put it.  TED talk which has more than five point five million views his last name is if you want to look that up but otherwise download the free headspace app I have it on my phone and begin there take ten program.  For ten days of guided meditation completely free ten minutes a day that's all it takes you should give it a shot him.  Just go to headspace dot com Tim. 
